# Magic

Magic is wild and untamed in the world of $WORLDNAME! Despite this, millenia of
study have come together to define it all rather well. And so, here is
chronicled the opening chapter of Arcanology 101.

## What Magic Is

Magic is a potent energy that channels through the world. It is contained within
leylines, dense pipelines of etherplasm that worm their way through the deep
bedrock. This gel-like fluid is thought to originate in the Ether, a vast and
endless expanse of pure arcane force.

## Controlling Magic

Six things are required to throttle the potent chaos of magic. These are water,
earth, fire, air, spirit, and a focus. You will learn more about the
significance of the five elements in your university's Introduction to Alchemy
course, but the focus will be covered here. Foci are used as a conduit for
concentration, and often contain a circle. Circles are used by mages the world
over to bind energies and allow them to form a circulating current. The five
elements and the focus are represented in the pentacle, a five-pointed star
enclosed in a circle, a common focus.
![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Pentacle_3.svg/1024px-Pentacle_3.svg.png)

## Schools of Magic

Magic is divided into schools, basic categorizations of each magic based on
technique and effect. Evocation, for example, is fast and explosive in both
effect and execution; meanwhile, the subtle enchantment school is careful and
deliberate in its production of long-lasting and intricate spells.

## Leylines

As discussed, leylines are conduits for magical energy. But what happens when
one is uncovered? They are not a metaphorical pipeline. Etherplasm actually does
flow through the earth. And when one finds its solid confines broken through,
this fluid quickly hardens as the magic within it escapes. This magic, totally
uncontrolled by conscious minds, runs rampant, having all sorts of effects.
Some leyline breaks unleash a deadly curse. Others create a wild, destructive
construct such as an elemental. More still cause wondrous effects. A leyline
break, in essence, is like a Wild Surge ten times over. So, please, *stay away
from massive dwarven mining projects*.

## The Purpose of Gold

Many of the most powerful spells and potent enchantments require a large amount
of gold. This is because gold is both a crude ore for mana, and an easy conduit
for channeling magical energies. As discussed earlier, when etherplasm is
released from its imprisonment in the walls, it solidifies, nearly devoid of
the energies it once contained. This solidified etherplasm is, in essence, a
gold "seed", that, given enough time, pressure, and heat, will turn into gold,
not unlike organic matter being turned into diamonds, and will even sometimes
leak from the leylines in the familiar lacerations of gold veins.